NEXT_STEPS.md, before:

# FAISSx: Next Steps

This document outlines the current status and next steps for the FAISSx project, which provides a high-performance vector database proxy using FAISS and ZeroMQ.

## Current Status

### Project Infrastructure (Complete ✅)
- [x] Project renamed from FAISS-Proxy to FAISSx
- [x] Directory structure reorganized (faissx, client, server, examples, data)
- [x] Build system configured (setup.py, MANIFEST.in)
- [x] Documentation updated
- [x] Basic Docker deployment

### Server Implementation (Complete ✅)
- [x] Create ZeroMQ server application structure
- [x] Implement authentication with API keys
- [x] Create FAISS manager for vector operations
- [x] Implement basic binary protocol for CRUD routes for indices
- [x] Implement vector addition and search operations
- [x] Add tenant isolation
- [x] Create Docker container setup
- [x] Create comprehensive server documentation

### Client Implementation (Complete ✅)
- [x] Create client package structure
- [x] Implement configuration management
- [x] Implement remote API client using ZeroMQ
- [x] Create IndexFlatL2 implementation with API parity
- [x] Add documentation for client usage
- [x] Implement drop-in replacement behavior
- [x] Create test suite for client functionality

### Packaging and Distribution (Complete ✅)
- [x] Publish to PyPI
- [x] Publish Docker images to GitHub Container Registry
- [x] Create automated build and test pipeline (GitHub Actions)


## Next Milestones

### Server Enhancements
- [x] Add support for additional FAISS index types:
  - [x] IndexIVFFlat
  - [x] IndexHNSW
  - [x] IndexPQ
- [x] Implement index training endpoints
- [x] Add specialized search operations (range search, etc.)

### Client Library Enhancements
- [x] Implement additional FAISS index classes
- [x] Add support for index training
- [x] Support for batch operations

### Advanced Features
- [ ] Optimize persistence layer for large indices
- [x] Add GPU support via FAISS GPU indices (Client side; local mode)
- [ ] Add GPU support via FAISS GPU indices (Server side)

## Implementation Priorities

### High Priority
1. ~~Publish to PyPI~~ ✅ Done
2. ~~Support for additional index types (IndexIVFFlat)~~ ✅ Done
3. ~~Implement proper index training~~ ✅ Done
4. Create detailed documentation and examples
   - [x] Comprehensive server documentation
   - [x] Client API documentation
   - [ ] More advanced examples and tutorials

### Medium Priority
1. Add more client-side features and FAISS compatibility
   - [x] Additional index types:
     - [x] IndexIVFPQ (IVF + Product Quantization)
     - [x] IndexScalarQuantizer (efficient scalar quantization)
     - [ ] IndexIDMap/IndexIDMap2 (custom vector IDs)
     - [ ] Binary indices (IndexBinaryFlat, etc.)
     - [ ] IndexPreTransform (vector transformations)
   - [ ] Additional operations:
     - [ ] Vector reconstruction (reconstruct() and reconstruct_n())
     - [ ] Custom ID support (add_with_ids())
     - [ ] Parameter control (nprobe, efSearch settings)
     - [ ] Vector removal (remove_ids())
   - [ ] Advanced features:
     - [ ] Factory pattern (index_factory)
     - [ ] Metadata filtering
     - [ ] Direct index persistence (write_index/read_index)
     - [ ] Index modification (merging, splitting)
   - [ ] Optimization controls:
     - [ ] Fine-grained parameters
     - [ ] Memory management options
2. Create benchmarking tools
3. Add performance optimizations

### Low Priority
1. GPU support
2. Monitoring dashboard
3. Additional language clients (TypeScript, Go, etc.)
4. Implement metadata filtering
5. Add error recovery and reconnection
6. Implement caching for frequently accessed indices
7. Support for distributed indices
8. High availability configuration

## Get Involved

We welcome contributions to the FAISSx project. Here are some ways to get started:

1. Try out the current implementation and provide feedback
2. Help with additional index type implementation
3. Create examples and tutorials
4. Improve documentation
   - Server and client core documentation is complete
   - Help with advanced usage examples and tutorials
5. Add benchmarking and performance tests

## Decision Log

- **2023-05-18**: ✅ Decided to split the project into server and client components
- **2023-05-18**: ✅ Selected ZeroMQ for the server implementation
- **2023-05-18**: ✅ Chose to implement a drop-in replacement client library for FAISS
- **2023-05-18**: ✅ Implemented tenant isolation for multi-application deployments
- **2023-05-25**: ✅ Completed test implementation for server and client components
- **2023-06-15**: ✅ Project renamed from FAISS-Proxy to FAISSx
- **2023-06-22**: ✅ Completed client implementation with IndexFlatL2 support
- **2023-07-15**: ✅ Added proper licensing and documentation to all components
- **2023-08-02**: ✅ Created comprehensive server documentation with API protocol details
- **2023-10-05**: ✅ Published package to PyPI
- **2023-10-10**: ✅ Created Docker images with multi-architecture support (AMD64/ARM64)
- **2023-10-15**: ✅ Set up GitHub Actions for automated Docker image builds
- **2023-10-20**: ✅ Improved server startup messaging for better clarity and consistency

## Docker and Container Support

### Current Features
- [x] Official Docker images published to GitHub Container Registry
- [x] Multi-architecture support (AMD64/ARM64)
- [x] Slim image variant using multi-stage builds
- [x] Development container with volume-mounted source code
- [x] Docker Compose configuration for easy deployment

### Container Usage
```bash
# Pull and run the official image
docker run -p 45678:45678 ghcr.io/muxi-ai/faissx:latest

# Pull and run the slim variant
docker run -p 45678:45678 ghcr.io/muxi-ai/faissx:slim

# Run with persistence enabled
docker run -p 45678:45678 -v /path/to/data:/data -e FAISSX_DATA_DIR=/data ghcr.io/muxi-ai/faissx:latest

# Run with authentication
docker run -p 45678:45678 -e FAISSX_ENABLE_AUTH=true -e FAISSX_AUTH_KEYS="key1:tenant1,key2:tenant2" ghcr.io/muxi-ai/faissx:latest
```

### Development Setup
```bash
# Use Docker Compose to run the development container
docker-compose up

# Or build and run the development container manually
docker build -t faissx:dev -f Dockerfile.dev .
docker run -p 45678:45678 -v $(pwd):/app faissx:dev
```

Commit message:

Update NEXT_STEPS.md and README.md to reflect recent enhancements in FAISSx project
- Added modular code architecture with separate index implementations for improved maintainability.
- Enhanced client documentation to clarify usage of new index types and GPU acceleration support.
- Updated variable names in examples for better readability and consistency.
- Documented supported index types and their functionalities in README.md.
- Improved code quality and linter compliance across the project.

NEXT_STEPS.md, after:

# FAISSx: Next Steps

This document outlines the current status and next steps for the FAISSx project, which provides a high-performance vector database proxy using FAISS and ZeroMQ.

## Current Status

### Project Infrastructure (Complete ✅)
- [x] Project renamed from FAISS-Proxy to FAISSx
- [x] Directory structure reorganized (faissx, client, server, examples, data)
- [x] Build system configured (setup.py, MANIFEST.in)
- [x] Documentation updated
- [x] Basic Docker deployment
- [x] Modular code architecture with separate index implementations

### Server Implementation (Complete ✅)
- [x] Create ZeroMQ server application structure
- [x] Implement authentication with API keys
- [x] Create FAISS manager for vector operations
- [x] Implement basic binary protocol for CRUD routes for indices
- [x] Implement vector addition and search operations
- [x] Add tenant isolation
- [x] Create Docker container setup
- [x] Create comprehensive server documentation

### Client Implementation (Complete ✅)
- [x] Create client package structure
- [x] Implement configuration management
- [x] Implement remote API client using ZeroMQ
- [x] Create IndexFlatL2 implementation with API parity
- [x] Add documentation for client usage
- [x] Implement drop-in replacement behavior
- [x] Create test suite for client functionality
- [x] Add support for all major index types
- [x] Improve code readability with descriptive variable names

### Packaging and Distribution (Complete ✅)
- [x] Publish to PyPI
- [x] Publish Docker images to GitHub Container Registry
- [x] Create automated build and test pipeline (GitHub Actions)


## Next Milestones

### Server Enhancements
- [x] Add support for additional FAISS index types:
  - [x] IndexIVFFlat
  - [x] IndexHNSW
  - [x] IndexPQ
- [x] Implement index training endpoints
- [x] Add specialized search operations (range search, etc.)

### Client Library Enhancements
- [x] Implement additional FAISS index classes
- [x] Add support for index training
- [x] Support for batch operations
- [x] Refactor monolithic implementation to modular architecture
- [x] Improve code quality and linter compliance

### Advanced Features
- [ ] Optimize persistence layer for large indices
- [x] Add GPU support via FAISS GPU indices (Client side; local mode)
- [ ] Add GPU support via FAISS GPU indices (Server side)

## Implementation Priorities

### High Priority
1. ~~Publish to PyPI~~ ✅ Done
2. ~~Support for additional index types (IndexIVFFlat)~~ ✅ Done
3. ~~Implement proper index training~~ ✅ Done
4. ~~Refactor code architecture for better maintainability~~ ✅ Done
5. Create detailed documentation and examples
   - [x] Comprehensive server documentation
   - [x] Client API documentation
   - [ ] More advanced examples and tutorials

### Medium Priority
1. Add more client-side features and FAISS compatibility
   - [x] Additional index types:
     - [x] IndexIVFPQ (IVF + Product Quantization)
     - [x] IndexScalarQuantizer (efficient scalar quantization)
     - [ ] IndexIDMap/IndexIDMap2 (custom vector IDs)
     - [ ] Binary indices (IndexBinaryFlat, etc.)
     - [ ] IndexPreTransform (vector transformations)
   - [ ] Additional operations:
     - [ ] Vector reconstruction (reconstruct() and reconstruct_n())
     - [ ] Custom ID support (add_with_ids())
     - [ ] Parameter control (nprobe, efSearch settings)
     - [ ] Vector removal (remove_ids())
   - [ ] Advanced features:
     - [ ] Factory pattern (index_factory)
     - [ ] Metadata filtering
     - [ ] Direct index persistence (write_index/read_index)
     - [ ] Index modification (merging, splitting)
   - [ ] Optimization controls:
     - [ ] Fine-grained parameters
     - [ ] Memory management options
2. Create benchmarking tools
3. Add performance optimizations

### Low Priority
1. GPU support for server-side operations
2. Monitoring dashboard
3. Additional language clients (TypeScript, Go, etc.)
4. Implement metadata filtering
5. Add error recovery and reconnection
6. Implement caching for frequently accessed indices
7. Support for distributed indices
8. High availability configuration

## Get Involved

We welcome contributions to the FAISSx project. Here are some ways to get started:

1. Try out the current implementation and provide feedback
2. Help with additional index type implementation
3. Create examples and tutorials
4. Improve documentation
   - Server and client core documentation is complete
   - Help with advanced usage examples and tutorials
5. Add benchmarking and performance tests

## Decision Log

- **2023-05-18**: ✅ Decided to split the project into server and client components
- **2023-05-18**: ✅ Selected ZeroMQ for the server implementation
- **2023-05-18**: ✅ Chose to implement a drop-in replacement client library for FAISS
- **2023-05-18**: ✅ Implemented tenant isolation for multi-application deployments
- **2023-05-25**: ✅ Completed test implementation for server and client components
- **2023-06-15**: ✅ Project renamed from FAISS-Proxy to FAISSx
- **2023-06-22**: ✅ Completed client implementation with IndexFlatL2 support
- **2023-07-15**: ✅ Added proper licensing and documentation to all components
- **2023-08-02**: ✅ Created comprehensive server documentation with API protocol details
- **2023-10-05**: ✅ Published package to PyPI
- **2023-10-10**: ✅ Created Docker images with multi-architecture support (AMD64/ARM64)
- **2023-10-15**: ✅ Set up GitHub Actions for automated Docker image builds
- **2023-10-20**: ✅ Improved server startup messaging for better clarity and consistency
- **2023-11-10**: ✅ Refactored client architecture to use modular index implementations
- **2023-11-15**: ✅ Improved code quality with descriptive variable names and linter compliance

## Docker and Container Support

### Current Features
- [x] Official Docker images published to GitHub Container Registry
- [x] Multi-architecture support (AMD64/ARM64)
- [x] Slim image variant using multi-stage builds
- [x] Development container with volume-mounted source code
- [x] Docker Compose configuration for easy deployment

### Container Usage
```bash
# Pull and run the official image
docker run -p 45678:45678 ghcr.io/muxi-ai/faissx:latest

# Pull and run the slim variant
docker run -p 45678:45678 ghcr.io/muxi-ai/faissx:slim

# Run with persistence enabled
docker run -p 45678:45678 -v /path/to/data:/data -e FAISSX_DATA_DIR=/data ghcr.io/muxi-ai/faissx:latest

# Run with authentication
docker run -p 45678:45678 -e FAISSX_ENABLE_AUTH=true -e FAISSX_AUTH_KEYS="key1:tenant1,key2:tenant2" ghcr.io/muxi-ai/faissx:latest
```

### Development Setup
```bash
# Use Docker Compose to run the development container
docker-compose up

# Or build and run the development container manually
docker build -t faissx:dev -f Dockerfile.dev .
docker run -p 45678:45678 -v $(pwd):/app faissx:dev
```
